doc: Add v1.0 release note (#3033)
projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor: doc/release_notes_1.0.rst

and checkout commands:

git clone https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor
cd acrn-hypervisor
git checkout v1.0

The project’s online technical documentation is also tagged to correspond 
with a specific release: generated v1.0 documents can be found at https://projectacrn.github.io/1.0/. 
Documentation for the latest (master) branch is found at https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/.
ACRN v1.0 requires Clear Linux OS version 29070 or newer. Please follow the 
instructions in the Getting started guide for Intel NUC.

Version 1.0 new features
************************

VirtHardware Support
====================
Apollo Lake NUC, Apollo Lake UP Squared (UP2) board with serial port and 
Kaby Lake NUC are supported. (See Supported Hardware for supported platform 
details.)

APL UP2 board with SBL firmware: ACRN supports APL UP2 board with Slim 
Bootloader (SBL) firmware. Slim Bootloader is a modern, flexible, 
light-weight, open source reference bootloader that is also  fast, small, 
customizable, and secure. An end-to-end reference build has been verified 
on UP2/SBL board using  ACRN hypervisor, Clear Linux OS as SOS, and Clear 

> Linux OS as UOS. See the Using SBL on UP2 Board documentation for 

Author: Yes, that tutorial is still valid and now the Clear Linux version is update to 29070.

> Linux OS as UOS. See the Using SBL on UP2 Board documentation for 

Author: Yes, that tutorial is still valid and now the Clear Linux version is update to 29070.

step-by-step instructions.

VT-x, VT-d
==========
Based on Intel VT-x virtualization technology, ACRN emulates a virtual CPU 
with core partition and simple scheduling. VT-d provides hardware support 
for isolating and restricting device accesses to only the owner of the 
partition managing the device. It allows assigning I/O devices to a VM, 
and extending the protection and isolation properties of VMs for 
I/O operations.

PIC/IOAPIC/MSI/MSI-X/PCI/LAPIC
==============================
ACRN hypervisor supports virtualized APIC-V, EPT, IOAPIC, and LAPIC functionality.

One E2E binary to support all UEFI platform: ACRN can support both Apollo Lake 
(APL) and Kaby Lake (KBL) NUCs. Instead of having separate builds, this release 
offers community developers a single end-to-end reference build that supports 

> both UEFI hardware platforms, configured with a new boot parameter. See Getting 

Author: this should be 'new board parameter'

Started Guides for more information.

Enable Privileged VM support for real-time UOS in ACRN: Initial patches to enable 
a User OS (UOS) running as a virtual machine (VM) with real-time characteristics, 
also called a “Privileged VM”. We’ve published a tutorial Using PREEMPT_RT-Linux 
for real-time UOS. More patches for ACRN real time support will continue.

Enable cache QOS with CAT
=========================
Cache Allocation Technology (CAT) is avaible on Apollo Lake (APL) platforms, 
providing cache isolation between VMs mainly for real-time performance quality 
of service (QoS). The CAT for a specific VM is normally set up at boot time per 
the VM configuration determined at build time. For debugging and performance 
tuning, the CAT can also be enabled and configured at runtime by writing proper 
values to certain MSRs using the wrmsr command on ACRN shell.

Enable QoS based on runC container
==================================
ACRN supports Device-Model QoS based on runC container to control the SOS 

> resources (CPU, Storage, MEM, NET) by modifying the runC configuration file.

Reviewer: We don't seem to have any documentation about this feature, can we add some for the 1.0 release. It would be important in my opinion since it's called out here.

S5 support for RTVM
===================
ACRN supports a Real-time VM (RTVM) shutting itself down. A RTVM is a kind 
of VM that the SOS can’t interfere with at runtime, and as such, only the 
RTVM can power itself off internally. All power-off requests external to the 
RTVM will be rejected to avoid any interference.

Ethernet
========
ACRN hypervisor supports virtualized Ethernet functionality. The Ethernet 
Mediator is executed in the Service OS and provides packet forwarding between 
the physical networking devices (Ethernet, Wi-Fi, etc.) and virtual devices in
the Guest VMs (also called “User OS”). The Virtual Ethernet device can be shared 
by Linux, Android, and Service OS guests for regular (i.e. non-AVB) traffic. All 
hypervisor para-virtualized I/O is implemented using the VirtIO specification 

> Ethernet pass-through.

Author: "All hypervisor para-virtualized I/O is implemented using the VirtIO specification Ethernet pass-through." should be deleted.

Storage (eMMC)
==============
ACRN hypervisor supports virtualized non-volatile R/W storage for the Service 
OS and Guest OS instances, supporting VM private storage and/or storage shared 
between Guest OS instances.

USB (xDCI)
==========
ACRN hypervisor supports virtualized assignment of all USB xHCI and/or xDCI 
controllers to a Guest OS from the platform.

USB Mediator (xHCI and DRD)
===========================
ACRN hypervisor supports a virtualized USB Mediator.

Intel® Converged Security and Management Engine  (CSME)
=======================================================
ACRN hypervisor supports a CSME to a single Linux, Android, or RTOS guest or 
the Service OS even when in a virtualized environment.

WiFi
====
ACRN hypervisor supports the passthrough assignment of the WiFi subsystem to 

> the IVI, enables control of the WiFi as an in-vehicle hotspot for 3rd party 

Reviewer: We should spell out the acronym here, i.e.:
```suggestion
the In-Vehicle Infotainment (IVI) VM, enables control of the WiFi as an in-vehicle hotspot for 3rd party 
```

devices, provides 3rd party device applications access to the vehicle, and 
provides access of 3rd party devices to the TCU provided connectivity.

IPU (MIPI CSI-2, HDMI-in)
=========================
ACRN hypervisor supports passthrough IPU assignment to Service OS or Guest 
OS, without sharing.

Bluetooth
=========
ACRN hypervisor supports bluetooth controller passthrough to a single Guest 
OS (IVI).

GVT-g for ACRN
==============
GVT-g for ACRN (a.k.a AcrnGT) is a feature to enable GPU sharing Service OS 
and User OS, so both can run GPU workload simultaneously. Direct display is 
supported by AcrnGT, where the Service OS and User OS are each assigned to 
a different display. The display ports support eDP and HDMI. See GVT-g 

> high-level design documentation for more information.

Reviewer: Add link to do (using `:ref:`)

GPU - Preemption
================
GPU Preemption is one typical automotive use case which requires the system 
to preempt GPU resources occupied by lower priority workloads. This is done 
to ensure performance of the most critical workload can be achieved. Three 
different schedulers for the GPU are involved: i915 UOS scheduler, Mediator 
GVT scheduler, and i915 SOS scheduler.

GPU - display surface sharing via Hyper DMA
===========================================
Surface sharing is one typical automotive use case which requires that the 
SOS accesses an individual surface or a set of surfaces from the UOS without 
having to access the entire frame buffer of the UOS. Hyper DMA Buffer sharing 
extends the Linux DMA buffer sharing mechanism where one driver is able to 
share its pages with another driver within one domain.

Virtio standard is supported
============================
Virtio is a virtualization standard for network and disk device drivers where 
the guest’s device driver “knows” it is running in a virtual environment, and 
cooperates with the hypervisor. The SOS and UOS can share physical LAN network 

> and physical eMMC storage device. (See Virtio devices high-level design for 

Reviewer: In the paragraphs above, we also mention that WiFi can be used as a shared uplink for the SOS and different UOS, if true, we need to add this to the section too.

Similar comment about the eMMC, ACRN can also use SATA or NVMe drives as shared storage.

> more information.)

Reviewer: Add links to the HLDs in question.

Device pass-through support
===========================
Device pass-through to UOS supported.

> OVMF support initial patches merged in ACRN: To support booting Windows as a 

Reviewer: This should be promoted as a new section (it's under the pass-through description now).

Guest OS, we are using Open source Virtual Machine Firmware (OVMF). Initial 
patches to support OVMF have been merged in ACRN hypervisor. More patches for 
ACRN and patches upstreaming to OVMF work will be continuing.

Support ACPI power key mediator
===============================
ACRN supports ACPI power/sleep key on the APL and KBL NUC platforms, triggering 
S3/S5 flow, following the ACPI spec.

> GPIO virtualization

Reviewer: Do we have an HLD about the GPIO virtualization design that we could point people at?

===================
GPIO virtualization is supported as para-virtualization based on the Virtual 
I/O Device (VIRTIO) specification. The GPIO consumers of the Front-end are able
to set or get GPIO values, directions, and configuration via one virtual GPIO 
controller. In the Back-end, the GPIO command line in the launch script can be 
modified to map native GPIO to UOS.

New ACRN tools
==============

> We’ve added a collection of support tools including acrnctl, acrntrace, acrnlog, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ve added a collection of support tools including ``acrnctl``, ``acrntrace``, ``acrnlog``, 
```

> acrn-crashlog, acrnprobe. (See Tools documentation for details.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``acrn-crashlog``, ``acrnprobe``. (See Tools documentation for details.)
```

> acrn-crashlog, acrnprobe. (See Tools documentation for details.)

Reviewer: Add link to the Tools documentation page.

* :ref:`An introduction to Trusty and Security services on ACRN <trusty-security-services>`
* A Wiki article about `Porting ClearLinux/ACRN to support Yocto/ACRN
  <https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor/wiki/Yocto-based-Service-OS-(SOS)-and-User-OS-(UOS)-on-ACRN>`_
* An `ACRN brochure update (English and Chinese)
  <https://projectacrn.org/#code-docs>`_
* ACRN Roadmap: look ahead in `2019
  <https://projectacrn.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/59/2019/02/ACRN-Rodamap-2019.pdf>`_
* Performance analysis of `VBS-k framework
  <https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/developer-guides/VBSK-analysis.html>`_
* HLD design doc for `IOC virtualization
  <https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/developer-guides/hld/hld-APL_GVT-g.html?highlight=hld>`_
* Additional project `coding guidelines
  <coding_guidelines.html>`_
* :ref:`Zephyr RTOS as Guest OS <using_zephyr_as_uos>`
* :ref:`Enable cache QoS with CAT <using_cat_up2>`
* :ref:`ACRN kernel parameter introduction <kernel-parameters>`
* :ref:`FAQ update for two issues <faq>`
* :ref:`ACRN Debug introduction <acrn-debug>`
* USB controller (including USB2.0 and 3.0 disk, keyboard, mouse)
* SD card (mount, read, and write directly in the UOS)

> * Converged Security Engine (`CSE

Reviewer: We should add a proper link to that section instead of pointing at the URL

  <https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/developer-guides/hld/hld-security.html?highlight=CSE>`_)

> New Features Details

Reviewer 2: Are these ALL the features added since 0.1?  You list lots of documents in the previous section, but not many features here and there were over 2200 PRs closed.

********************

- :acrn-issue:`890` - Security: Guest OS ID
- :acrn-issue:`904` - IPU Passthrough
- :acrn-issue:`2187` - Complete the cleanup of unbounded APIs usage
- :acrn-issue:`2481` - Enable IOC mediator dummy channels dynamically
- :acrn-issue:`2534` - VPCI code cleanup: unify the vpci sharing and partition mode
- :acrn-issue:`2560` - Support ACPI power key mediator
- :acrn-issue:`2577` - allocate 64bit MMIO above 4G strictly to pass OVMF check
- :acrn-issue:`2604` - Attestation Keybox support for ACRN
- :acrn-issue:`2724` - hv: refactor seed management
- :acrn-issue:`2738` - Use domain/device specific invalidation for DMAR translation caches
- :acrn-issue:`2763` - Fix pthread_cond_wait usage
- :acrn-issue:`2821` - Disable MPX capability in guest VM New feature

> Fixed Issues Details

Reviewer 2: What was the reason for only listing these issues as fixed (there are 741 GitHub issues closed).

   2) Boot UOS by sharing the USB keyboard and mouse in cmd line:

      ``-s n,xhci,1-1:1-2:1-3:1-4:2-1:2-2:2-3:2-4 \``

   3) UOS access USB keyboard and mouse.
   4) Exit UOS.
   5) SOS tries to access USB keyboard and mouse, and fails.

   **Impact:** SOS cannot use USB keyboard and mouse in such case.

   **Workaround:** Unplug and plug-in the USB keyboard and mouse after exiting UOS.

-----

:acrn-issue:`2527` - System will crash after a few minutes running stress test ``crashme`` tool in SOS/UOS.
   System stress test may cause a system crash.

   **Impact:** System may crash in some stress situations.

   **Workaround:** None

-----

:acrn-issue:`2526` - Hypervisor crash when booting UOS with acrnlog running with mem loglevel=6
   If we use ``loglevel 3 6`` to change the mem loglevel to 6, we may hit a page fault in HV.

   **Impact:** Hypervisor may crash in some situation.

   **Workaround:** None

-----

:acrn-issue:`2753` - UOS cannot resume after suspend by pressing power key
   UOS cannot resume after suspend by pressing power key

   **Impact:** UOS may failed to resume after suspend by pressing the power key.

   **Workaround:** None

Change Log
**********

> These commits have been added to the acrn-hypervisor repo since the v0.6

Reviewer 2: Does this ``since the v0.6 release`` need to be changed?  You certainly don't want to list all commits since the 0.1 release though.

ACRN supports Device-Model QoS based on runC container to control the SOS 
resources (CPU, Storage, MEM, NET) by modifying the runC configuration file.

S5 support for RTVM
===================
ACRN supports a Real-time VM (RTVM) shutting itself down. A RTVM is a kind 
of VM that the SOS can’t interfere with at runtime, and as such, only the 
RTVM can power itself off internally. All power-off requests external to the 
RTVM will be rejected to avoid any interference.

Ethernet
========
ACRN hypervisor supports virtualized Ethernet functionality. The Ethernet 
Mediator is executed in the Service OS and provides packet forwarding between 
the physical networking devices (Ethernet, Wi-Fi, etc.) and virtual devices in
the Guest VMs (also called “User OS”). The Virtual Ethernet device can be shared 
by Linux, Android, and Service OS guests for regular (i.e. non-AVB) traffic.

Storage (eMMC)
==============
ACRN hypervisor supports virtualized non-volatile R/W storage for the Service 
OS and Guest OS instances, supporting VM private storage and/or storage shared 
between Guest OS instances.

USB (xDCI)
==========
ACRN hypervisor supports virtualized assignment of all USB xHCI and/or xDCI 

> controllers to a Guest OS from the platform.

Reviewer: I don't quite understand this, is referring to passing an entire USB controller to a Guest (as a pass-through)?

USB Mediator (xHCI and DRD)
===========================

> ACRN hypervisor supports a virtualized USB Mediator.

Reviewer: Can we add a link to the USB HLD (https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/developer-guides/hld/usb-virt-hld.html)

.. _release_notes_1.0:

ACRN v1.0 (May 2019)
####################

We are pleased to announce the release of Project ACRN version 1.0,

> which is ACRN major milestone focused on automotive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a major ACRN project milestone focused on automotive application use.
```

ACRN is a flexible, lightweight reference hypervisor, built with 
real-time and safety-criticality in mind, optimized to streamline embedded 
development through an open source platform. Check out the :ref:`introduction` for more information.
All project ACRN source code is maintained in the https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor 
repository and includes folders for the ACRN hypervisor, the ACRN device 
model, tools, and documentation. You can either download this source code as
a zip or tar.gz file (see the `ACRN v1.0 GitHub release page
<https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor/releases/tag/v1.0>`_)
or use Git clone and checkout commands::

   git clone https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor
   cd acrn-hypervisor
   git checkout v1.0

The project’s online technical documentation is also tagged to correspond 
with a specific release: generated v1.0 documents can be found at https://projectacrn.github.io/1.0/. 
Documentation for the latest (master) branch is found at https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/.
ACRN v1.0 requires Clear Linux OS version 29070 or newer. Please follow the 
instructions in the :ref:`getting-started-apl-nuc`.

> Version 1.0 new features

Reviewer 2: These aren't all "new" features since the last release, so this whould say something like ``Version 1.0 major features``.

************************

Hardware Support
================
Apollo Lake NUC, Apollo Lake UP Squared (UP2) board and
Kaby Lake NUC are supported. (See :ref:`hardware` for supported platform details.)

> APL UP2 board with SBL firmware: ACRN supports APL UP2 board with Slim 

Reviewer 2: I think this is a missed heading:
```
APL UP2 board with SBL firmware
===============================
ACRN supports APL UP2 board with Slim 
```

Bootloader (SBL) firmware. Slim Bootloader is a modern, flexible, 
light-weight, open source reference bootloader that is also  fast, small, 
customizable, and secure. An end-to-end reference build has been verified 
on UP2/SBL board using ACRN hypervisor, Clear Linux OS as SOS, and Clear
Linux OS as UOS. See the :ref:`using-sbl-up2` for
step-by-step instructions.

Enable post-launched RTVM support for real-time UOS in ACRN
===========================================================

> Initial patches to enable a User OS (UOS) running as a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This release provides initial patches enabling a User OS (UOS) running as a
```

with Linux, Android by Service OS guests for regular (i.e. non-AVB) traffic.

Mass Storage
============
ACRN hypervisor supports virtualized non-volatile R/W storage for the Service 
OS and Guest OS instances, supporting VM private storage and/or storage shared 
between Guest OS instances.

USB (xDCI)
==========
ACRN hypervisor supports pass-through of xDCI 
controllers to a Guest OS from the platform.

USB Mediator (xHCI)
===================
ACRN hypervisor supports an emulated USB xHCI controller for Guest OS.
(See :ref:`usb_virtualization` for more information.)

WiFi
====
ACRN hypervisor supports doing a pass-through of the WiFi chip to 
a Guest VM (UOS), enables control of the WiFi as an in-vehicle hotspot for third-party
devices, provides third-party device applications access to the vehicle, and
provides access of third-party devices to the TCU (if applicable) provided connectivity.

IPU (MIPI CSI-2, HDMI-in)
=========================
ACRN hypervisor provide an IPU mediator to share with Guest OS. Altenatively, IPU
can also be configured as pass-through to Guest OS without sharing.

Bluetooth
=========

> ACRN hypervisor supports bluetooth controller passthrough to a single Guest 

Reviewer 2: Bluetooth is a trademark name spelled with an uppercase B:
```suggestion
ACRN hypervisor supports Bluetooth controller passthrough to a single Guest 
```

> OS (IVI).

Reviewer 2: Should we leave off IVI here?  If you leave it in, spell it out:
```suggestion
OS (for example, for In-Vehicle Infotainment or IVI use cases).
```

GVT-g for ACRN
==============
GVT-g for ACRN (a.k.a AcrnGT) is a feature to enable GPU sharing Service OS 
and User OS, so both can run GPU workload simultaneously. Direct display is 
supported by AcrnGT, where the Service OS and User OS are each assigned to 
a different display. The display ports support eDP and HDMI. See :ref:`APL_GVT-g-hld`
for more information.

GPU - Preemption
================
GPU Preemption is one typical automotive use case which requires the system 
to preempt GPU resources occupied by lower priority workloads. This is done 
to ensure performance of the most critical workload can be achieved. Three 
different schedulers for the GPU are involved: i915 UOS scheduler, Mediator 
GVT scheduler, and i915 SOS scheduler.

GPU - display surface sharing via Hyper DMA
===========================================
Surface sharing is one typical automotive use case which requires that the 
SOS accesses an individual surface or a set of surfaces from the UOS without 
having to access the entire frame buffer of the UOS. It leverages hyper_DMABUF,

> a linux kernel driver running on multiple VMs and expands DMA-BUFFER sharing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a Linux kernel driver running on multiple VMs and expands DMA-BUFFER sharing
```

capability to inter-VM.

Virtio standard is supported
============================
Virtio framework is widely used in ACRN, allowing devices beyond network and
storage to be shared to UOS in a standard way. Many mediators in ACRN follow

> virtio spec. Virtio-based virtualization is called para-virtualization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the virtio spec. Virtio-based virtualization is called para-virtualization.
```

   2) Boot UOS by sharing the USB keyboard and mouse in cmd line:

      ``-s n,xhci,1-1:1-2:1-3:1-4:2-1:2-2:2-3:2-4 \``

   3) UOS access USB keyboard and mouse.
   4) Exit UOS.
   5) SOS tries to access USB keyboard and mouse, and fails.

   **Impact:** SOS cannot use USB keyboard and mouse in such case.

   **Workaround:** Unplug and plug-in the USB keyboard and mouse after exiting UOS.

-----

:acrn-issue:`2527` - System will crash after a few minutes running stress test ``crashme`` tool in SOS/UOS.
   System stress test may cause a system crash.

   **Impact:** System may crash in some stress situations.

   **Workaround:** None

-----

:acrn-issue:`2526` - Hypervisor crash when booting UOS with acrnlog running with mem loglevel=6
   If we use ``loglevel 3 6`` to change the mem loglevel to 6, we may hit a page fault in HV.

   **Impact:** Hypervisor may crash in some situation.

   **Workaround:** None

-----

:acrn-issue:`2753` - UOS cannot resume after suspend by pressing power key
   UOS cannot resume after suspend by pressing power key

   **Impact:** UOS may failed to resume after suspend by pressing the power key.

   **Workaround:** None

-----

> :acrn-issue:`2974` - Launch Zephyr will take about 5 mins

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:acrn-issue:`2974` - Launching Zephyr RTOS as a realtime UOS takes too long
```
